Initial draft for Verifiable Data Aggregation (#568)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FRCs/frc-verifiable-data-aggregation.md

The Proof of Data Segment Inclusion allows to apply this new capability on segments of data which are too small to be on-boarded in their own deals due to economic constraints.

## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->
The specification consists of three parts:
- Data Segment Format and alignment
- Data Segment Index and retrieval handling
- Proof of Data Segment Inclusion 

### Data Segments

A Data Segment is an array of bytes the Client requested to be stored after the process of Fr32 bit padding.
Data Segments are identified by the commitment to data (using same algorithm as PieceCID, SHA-256-truncated, 2-ary Merkle Tree) and their size.

Data Segments can then be placed within a deal according to alignment rules of current sectors.

Data Segments have to aligned to the next power of two boundary with NUL trailer up to next power of the boundary.
```

> DataSegment size = ceil(original deal size * 128/127) // Fr32 padding

Author: ```suggestion
DataSegment size = ceil(original sub-deal size * 128/127) // Fr32 padding
```

- Data Segment Format and alignment
- Data Segment Index and retrieval handling
- Proof of Data Segment Inclusion 

### Data Segments

A Data Segment is an array of bytes the Client requested to be stored after the process of Fr32 bit padding.
Data Segments are identified by the commitment to data (using same algorithm as PieceCID, SHA-256-truncated, 2-ary Merkle Tree) and their size.

Data Segments can then be placed within a deal according to alignment rules of current sectors.

Data Segments have to aligned to the next power of two boundary with NUL trailer up to next power of the boundary.
```
DataSegment size = ceil(original sub-deal size * 128/127) // Fr32 padding
DataSegment alignment = pow(2, ceil(log2(DataSegment size))
DataSegment with trailer size = DataSegment alignment
```

### Data Segment Index

Data Segment Index is an optional region at the end of a deal describing all the data segments contained within that deal.
The index is constant sized depending on the size of the deal but not all entries in the Data Segment Index have to be utilised. Unused entires should be filled out with NUL bytes.

The number of entires in the index is defined as:
```

> number of entires = max(4, 2**floor(log2(padded size of deal / 2048 / 64 [byte/entry])))

Author: Resolved.

```

This results in index capable of containing 256Ki entries and using 16MiB with 32GiB deal.

Each entry within the Data Segment Index has size of 64 bytes after Fr32 bit padding resulting in usable space of 508 bits, two 254 bit nodes (two high bits of each 32byte node are set to 0s). Each entry is also aligned to 64 byte boundary after Fr32 bit padding.
The format is designed to be accessible and readable in the Fr32 padded form.

Entires consists of:
 - CommDS - commitment to the data segment, 254 bits, first node
 - Offset - offset in bytes from the start of the deal to the Data Segment, low 64 bits
 - Size - size in bytes of the Data Segment, next 64 bits
 - Checksum - SHA-256 of the `(CommDS, Offset, Size, 0s)` truncated to 126 bits filling out second node.

For the purpose of SHA-256 checksum, data is structured in the same format as Data Segment Index entry with checksum bits filled with 0s.

Data Segment Index entry is defined as valid if it is positioned within the Data Segment Index area, from the `start of the index` to the end of the deal and contains a valid checksum.

#### Retrieval handling 

> After receiving a deal data, a Storage Provider should process the index area to discover any valid Data Segment Index entries within that area.

Author: The primary purpose of indexing sub-deals is for retrieval but I will reword it.

> After receiving a deal data, a Storage Provider should process the index area to discover any valid Data Segment Index entries within that area.

Author: They would scan the data segment index for valid data segments. If they discover valid entries, they index them for retrieval; if not they attempt to read index the whole deal and each half.

> After receiving a deal data, a Storage Provider should process the index area to discover any valid Data Segment Index entries within that area.

Reviewer: Ok, a deal that has no index will have data in the index area, but it will fail checksum so can be ignored. If something that looks like an index entry has a good checksum, SP can assume it's an index entry.

When a valid entry is discovered the SP should queue up a task of computing the commitment of referenced Data Segment.
If the commitment in the index matches the referenced Data Segment, the Storage Provider should make in possible to retrieve the Data Segment via its Data Segment commitment (equivalent to PieceCID).

Apart from that Storage Provider should enable retrieval of PieceCIDs computed based on implicit data segments:
```
offset: 0, size: deal size / 2
offset: deal size / 2, size: deal size / 2

> ```

Author: This was added in response to your earlier feedback: "what if the sub-deals are 2x16GB".
It is entirely arbitrary, and we could add another power of two. The question is about the tradeoff of storing entries which  never will be used in the retrieval index vs the overhead of deal aggregation.

I would also consider removing this entirely as 16GB deals could land on their own or be aggregated with bunch of smaller deals.

> ```

Reviewer: Ok, I think we should remove this.

The response I expected is "tough luck, you can't fit 2x16GiB deals in a sector with an index because there's not enough space". And then maybe we should call this out explicitly (ditto for all power of two sized subdeals) and perhaps identify what is the maximum subdeal size (not a power of 2?) that packs well with an index, or otherwise how to maximise useful sector capacity.

### Proof of Data Segment Inclusion

The proof consists of two inclusion proofs:

> - An inclusion proof of a sub-tree corresponding to the tree of the client’s data, optionally this sub-tree can be miss-aligned with the proving tree.

Reviewer: Clarify inclusion into what?

- An inclusion proof of the double leaf data segment descriptor within the data segment index.

The client possesses the following information: Commitment to their data $\mathrm{CommDS}$ and size of their data $|{\mathrm{DS}}|$.

The aggregator inserts client’s data into the sector or deal, and also adds the data segment descriptor into data segment index.

Following that, the aggregator produces the data commitment and two inclusion proofs and provides them to the client:

- $\mathrm{CommD}_ A$ - a commitment to the data created by the aggregator
- $|\mathrm{D}_ A|$ - size of the aggregator’s data, corresponding to deal/sector size.
- $\mathrm{pos}_ D$ - position of client’s data within the aggregator’s data
- $\mathrm{idx}_ {ds}$ - index of data segment descriptor within the data segment index
- $\pi_ {st}$ - sub-tree proof, proving the inclusion of $\mathrm{DS}$ in $\mathrm{D}_ A$ at position $\mathrm{pos}_ D$
- $\pi_ {ds}$- leaf inclusion proof, proving the inclusion of $(\mathrm{CommD}_ A, \mathrm{pos}_ D, |\mathrm{D}_ C|, \mathrm{checksum})$ within $\mathrm{D}_ {A}$ at $f(\mathrm{idx}_ {ds}, |\mathrm{D}_ A|)$

> The $f(\mathrm{idx}, \mathrm{size})$ is a pre-agreed function mapping position within the data segment index to position within the container. 

Reviewer: This is perhaps the most confusing piece here. Could you illustrate with an example?

It would be slightly less confusing if it was "mapping position _of_ the data segment index to a position within the container/deal" (e.g. "index at the end"). As written, it sounds like the index need not be contiguous – is that intentional?

Author: The index is continuous block at the end of the deal but nothing during verification requires that the valid entries be continuous within the index.

Author: I will update description of the verification.

- Verify that `DealID` is active on chain
- Verify that `DealID` has data commitmetn of $\mathrm{CommD}_ A$ and size $|\mathrm{D}_A|$.

## Design Rationale
<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

The design of this proposal is guided by three main goals: to ensure the provable inclusion of the client's data within the aggregator's on-chain data deal, to make it easy for the storage provider to find the user's data within the larger data segment, and to prevent malicious behavior of the aggregator or other users whose data was aggregated from causing irrecoverable problems with retrieval.

To achieve the first goal, the proposal includes a mechanism for producing an inclusion proof. This proof allows the client or a third party to verify that their data is properly included within the on-chain deal.

> Additionally, the proposal includes a Data Segment Index which provides discoverability of data within the sector. This feature allows the storage provider to easily locate the client's data and prevents malicious behavior from influencing the retrieval of data. By including this mechanism, the proposal ensures that the client's data is retrievable, even if there is malicious behavior from the aggregator or other users.

Reviewer: Is there anything to say about alternatives or tradeoffs in this section? Or constraints that forced this shape of solution?

---
fip: "<to be assigned>" <!--keep the qoutes around the fip number, i.e: `fip: "0001"`-->
title: Verifiable Data Aggregation
author: Jakub Sztandera (@Kubuxu), Nicola Greco (@nicola), Peter Rabbitson (@ribasushi)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/512
status: Draft
type: FRC
created: 2022-12-11
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged FIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new FIPs. Note that a FIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your FIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `fip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the FIP.-->

> Enable Clients using data aggregation services to verify correct aggregation of their data and allow proving of this fact to third parties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable Clients using data aggregation services to verify the correct aggregation of their data and allow proving of this fact to third parties.
```

## Abstract
<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->

> This proposal provides a description of a scheme enabling Aggregators to produce

Reviewer 2: Could you please define what is _aggregators_?

Author: Done in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/568/files#r1118829207

> a Proof of Data Segment inclusion certifying proper aggregation of Client's data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a Proof of Data Segment inclusion certifying proper aggregation of Client's data.
```

> a Proof of Data Segment inclusion certifying proper aggregation of Client's data.

Author: ```suggestion
a Proof of Data Segment Inclusion certifying proper aggregation of Client's data.
```

The produced proof assures:

> - an inclusion of Client's data within the on-chian deal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an inclusion of Client's data within the on-chain deal
```

- the Client's data can be trivially discovered within the deal to enable retrieval
- malicious behaviour of an Aggregator or another user, whose data was aggregated, does not interfere with retrievability of Client's data

## Change Motivation
<!--The motivation is critical for FIPs that want to change the Filecoin protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the FIP solves. FIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.-->

> A large majority of users onboard data onto the Filecoin network via an Aggregator. Today the work done by aggregators is unverifiable and unprovable.

Author: ```suggestion
A large majority of users onboard data onto the Filecoin network via an Aggregator, a third party combining small pieces of data into a singular large deal. Today the work done by aggregators is unverifiable and unprovable.
```

> The user relies on the Aggregator to perform the work correctly and at the same time, it is impossible to prove to a third party that a given piece of data was included in a deal which is a highly requested functionality for FVM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user relies on the Aggregator to perform the work correctly and at the same time, it is impossible to prove to a third party that a given piece of data was included in a deal which is a highly requested functionality for user-programmable data use cases.
```

> This is a critical link in enabling data within aggregated deals to be as useful as deals themselves. 

Reviewer 2: I personally feel like _aggregated deal_ is somewhat confusing - as the aggregators _aggregate **data_** into deals, and _aggregated deal_ may be confused with "deals that are batched in one PSD".

Reviewer 2: We mostly see the term "data aggregation" as one step of the deal preparation.  How about an "aggregated piece"?

Author: ```suggestion
This is a critical link in enabling data within deals aggregating data from multiple Clients as useful as the deals themselves. 
```

Let me know if this is any better.

Without the proposed proof, data within aggregated deals becomes a second class citizen in Filecoin ecosystem.

> Significant portion of the F(E)VM use-case is enabling the ability to process and reason about the data stored by Filcoin Storage Providers. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A significant portion of the F(E)VM use-case is enabling the ability to process and reason about the data stored by Filecoin Storage Providers. 
```

The specification consists of three parts:
- Data Segment Format and alignment
- Data Segment Index and retrieval handling
- Proof of Data Segment Inclusion 

### Data Segments

A Data Segment is an array of bytes the Client requested to be stored after the process of Fr32 bit padding.
Data Segments are identified by the commitment to data (using same algorithm as PieceCID, SHA-256-truncated, 2-ary Merkle Tree) and their size.

Data Segments can then be placed within a deal according to alignment rules of current sectors.

Data Segments have to aligned to the next power of two boundary with NUL trailer up to next power of the boundary.
```
DataSegment size = ceil(original sub-deal size * 128/127) // Fr32 padding
DataSegment alignment = 2**ceil(log2(DataSegment size))
DataSegment with trailer size = DataSegment alignment
```

### Data Segment Index

Data Segment Index is an optional region at the end of a deal describing all the data segments contained within that deal.

> The index is constant sized depending on the size of the deal but not all entries in the Data Segment Index have to be utilised. Unused entries should be filled out with NUL bytes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The index is constantly sized depending on the size of the deal but not all entries in the Data Segment Index have to be utilised. Unused entries should be filled out with NUL bytes.
```

Author: I will use alternate wording.

> The index is constant sized depending on the size of the deal but not all entries in the Data Segment Index have to be utilised. Unused entries should be filled out with NUL bytes.

Author: ```suggestion
The index has a maximum size depending on the size of the deal, but not all entries in the Data Segment Index have to be utilised. Unused entries should be filled out with NUL bytes.
```

The number of entries in the index is defined as:
```
number of entries = max(4, 2**floor(log2(padded size of deal / 2048 / 64 [byte/entry])))
size of index = number of entries * 64 [byte/entry]
start of the index = (padded size of deal - size of index)
```

> This results in index capable of containing 256Ki entries and using 16MiB with 32GiB deal.

Reviewer 2: What about deals that are greater than 32GiB?

Author: The avliable space doubles.
```suggestion
This results in an index capable of containing 256Ki entries and using 16MiB with 32GiB deal and double that for 64GiB deal.
```

The format is designed to be accessible and readable in the Fr32 padded form.

Entires consists of:
 - CommDS - commitment to the data segment, 254 bits, first node
 - Offset - offset in bytes from the start of the deal to the Data Segment, low 64 bits
 - Size - size in bytes of the Data Segment, next 64 bits
 - Checksum - SHA-256 of the `(CommDS, Offset, Size, 0s)` truncated to 126 bits filling out second node.

For the purpose of SHA-256 checksum, data is structured in the same format as Data Segment Index entry with checksum bits filled with 0s.

Data Segment Index entry is defined as valid if it is positioned within the Data Segment Index area, from the `start of the index` to the end of the deal and contains a valid checksum.

#### Storage Provider data processing 

After receiving a deal data, a Storage Provider should process the index area to discover any valid Data Segment Index entries within that area.
When a valid entry is discovered the SP should queue up a task of computing the commitment of referenced Data Segment.

> If the commitment in the index matches the referenced Data Segment, the Storage Provider should make in possible to retrieve the Data Segment via its Data Segment commitment (equivalent to PieceCID).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the commitment in the index matches the referenced Data Segment, the Storage Provider should make it possible to retrieve the Data Segment via its Data Segment commitment (equivalent to PieceCID).
```

### Proof of Data Segment Inclusion

The proof consists of two inclusion proofs:

> - An inclusion proof of a sub-tree corresponding to the tree of the client’s data within aggregtor's commitment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An inclusion proof of a sub-tree corresponding to the tree of the Client’s data within aggregator's commitment.
```

- An inclusion proof of the double leaf data segment descriptor within the data segment index.

The client possesses the following information: Commitment to their data $\mathrm{CommDS}$ and size of their data $|{\mathrm{DS}}|$.

> The aggregator inserts client’s data into the sector or deal, and also adds the data segment descriptor into data segment index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The aggregator inserts Client’s data into the sector or deal, and also adds the data segment descriptor into data segment index.
```

Reviewer 2: Aggregator should only be able to insert client's data into deals, not the sectors IMHO. data/deal -> sector is complemented in SP's hands today.

Author: This is a leftover from previous version of the proposal/exploration.
```suggestion
The aggregator inserts Client’s data into the deal, and also adds the data segment descriptor into the data segment index.
```

Following that, the aggregator produces the data commitment and two inclusion proofs and provides them to the client:

- $\mathrm{CommD}_ A$ - a commitment to the data created by the aggregator
- $|\mathrm{D}_ A|$ - size of the aggregator’s data, corresponding to deal/sector size
- $\mathrm{pos}_ D$ - position of client’s data within the aggregator’s data
- $\pi_ {st}$ - sub-tree proof, proving the inclusion of $\mathrm{DS}$ in $\mathrm{D}_ A$ at position $\mathrm{pos}_ D$
- $\mathrm{pos}_ {ds}$ - position of the index entry within the aggregator's data
- $\pi_ {ds}$- leaf inclusion proof, proving the inclusion of $(\mathrm{CommD}_ A, \mathrm{pos}_ D, |\mathrm{D}_ C|, \mathrm{checksum})$ within $\mathrm{D}_ {A}$ at $\mathrm{pos}_ {ds}$.

> Auxiliary information provided by the aggregator to the client are: `DealID` of the deal which contains Client's data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auxiliary information provided by the aggregator to the Client are: `DealID` of the deal which contains Client's data.
```

> To complete the verification of the proof, the client has to verify the two inclusion proofs as well as check that a given sector was on-boarded and $\mathrm{CommD}_ A$ was size $|\mathrm{D}_ A|$:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To complete the verification of the proof, the Client has to verify the two inclusion proofs as well as check that a given sector was on-boarded and $\mathrm{CommD}_ A$ was size $|\mathrm{D}_ A|$:
```

Reviewer 2: check a given _deal_ (not a _sector_) was onboarded?

- $\mathrm{CommD}_ A', |\mathrm{D}_ A'| = \mathrm{ComputeRoot}(\mathrm{CommDS}, |\mathrm{DS}|, \pi_{st}, \mathrm{pos}_ D)$
- $\mathrm{CommD}_ A'', |\mathrm{D}_ A''| = \mathrm{ComputeRoot}(\mathrm{Comm}(\mathrm{CommDS}, \mathrm{pos}_ D, |\mathrm{D}_ C|, \mathrm{checksum}), 2, \pi_ {ds}, \mathrm{pos}_ {ds})$
- Verify $\mathrm{CommD}_ A' \overset{?}{=} \mathrm{CommD}_ A''$
- Verify $|\mathrm{D}_ A'| \overset{?}{=} |\mathrm{D}_ A''|$
- Verify that $\mathrm{pos}_ {ds}$ falls into data segment index based on $|\mathrm{D}_ A'|$.
- Verify that `DealID` is active on chain
- Verify that `DealID` has data commitment of $\mathrm{CommD}_ A'$ and size $|\mathrm{D}_ A'|$.

## Design Rationale
<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

> The design of this proposal is guided by three main goals: to ensure the provable inclusion of the client's data within the aggregator's on-chain data deal, to make it easy for the storage provider to find the user's data within the larger data segment, and to prevent malicious behavior of the aggregator or other users whose data was aggregated from causing irrecoverable problems with retrieval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The design of this proposal is guided by three main goals: to ensure the provable inclusion of the Client's data within the aggregator's on-chain data deal, to make it easy for the storage provider to find the user's data within the larger data segment, and to prevent malicious behavior of the aggregator or other users whose data was aggregated from causing irrecoverable problems with retrieval.
```

To achieve the first goal, the proposal includes a mechanism for producing an inclusion proof. This proof allows the client or a third party to verify that their data is properly included within the on-chain deal.

> Additionally, the proposal includes a Data Segment Index which provides discoverability of data within the sector. This feature allows the storage provider to easily locate the client's data and prevents malicious behavior from influencing the retrieval of data. By including this mechanism, the proposal ensures that the client's data is retrievable, even in presence of malicious behavior from the aggregator or other users.

Reviewer 2: > By including this mechanism, the proposal ensures that the client's data is retrievable, even in presence of malicious behavior from the aggregator or other users.

i might miss it somewhere, how is this achieved?

Author: See the Storage Povider data processing section: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/568/files#diff-1ee87bc673e78b3573ff5deb02b912ef52d2848f4f454fbb65ae4912ddb27f9eR84

Author: The Discussion IIRC contains an example of how the lack of data segment index can be exploited.

> Due to the commitments to data which are avliable on-chain Merkle inclusion proofs are the only choice for proving inclusion of client's sub-trees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the commitments to data which are available on-chain Merkle inclusion proofs are the only choice for proving inclusion of client's sub-trees.
```

> The existance of Data Segment Index within the deal in combindation with the power-of-two alighment constraint reduces the storage efficiency of subdeals if subdeals are large in relation to the deal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The existence of Data Segment Index within the deal in combination with the power-of-two alignment constraint reduces the storage efficiency of subdeals if subdeals are large in relation to the deal.
```

Reviewer 2: Would it be better to use sub-piece instead of sub-deal? one argument would be there exists sub piece CIDss but not sub deal ids

Author: The notion of a deal vs a piece is very fuzzy already. I'm not sure if it will serve to clarify or to confuse. Essentially Client's want sub-deal they don't know about notion of pieces.

> A deal containing Data Segment Index cannot include two deals with side half of that of data segment index. If the deal were to contain only two subdeals the maximum storage efficiency is 75%. The efficiency approaches 100% as the number of deals increases, reaching 99% with seven subdeals.

Reviewer 2: > with side half of that of data segment index.

Could you please elaborate on what you mean here, I'm having trouble understanding it?

Author: ```suggestion
A deal containing Data Segment Index cannot include two subdeals with a size half of the deal. If the deal were to contain only two subdeals the maximum storage efficiency is 75%. The efficiency approaches 100% as the number of subdeals increases, reaching 99% with seven subdeals.
```

> A deal containing Data Segment Index cannot include two deals with side half of that of data segment index. If the deal were to contain only two subdeals the maximum storage efficiency is 75%. The efficiency approaches 100% as the number of deals increases, reaching 99% with seven subdeals.

Reviewer 2: > . The efficiency approaches 100% as the number of deals increases, reaching 99% with seven subdeals.

"sub piece/deal" increases?
